# OCR

This is a web deployed project hosted on docker and Azure which allows users to draw a math digit ranging from 0-9 on a HTML canvas. The user drawn image is then processed and passed through an ML model to predict the digit it corresponds to.

## Problem Statement

Many businesses still rely on paper forms that customers are requested to fill-up in order for them to be registered and be served. However, customer records are stored digitally which means that the businesses require staff members to transcribe the information recorded on these paper forms onto a computer. Aside from taking up valuable time that the staff members could have used to serve other customers, the manual transcription of this information is also prone to human errors. 

Our intended solution to this problem was to use machine learning models to identify the intended characters from hand-written text.

## Project Objective

In this project, we have created and trained a model to identify handwritten digits. The resulting trained model has been deployed to the internet using the Azure cloud platform. The website is freely available for the public for anyone to interact with the model and submit their own samples to check if the model is able to predict the intended digit correctly. The website provides a blank canvas on which users can draw numbers.

## Project Scope

The scope of the project is as follows:

•	Character recognition is limited to only single-digit numbers (numbers from 0 to 9)
•	Character digit input is taken from whatever the user draws on a canvas provided to them by the website and is processed as a black and white image
•	Only a single digit is processed and predicted at a time, i.e. strings of multiple digits in the same image is not in the scope of the project so the user must only draw one digit at a time on the canvas (the user can use the “redraw” button to clear the canvas and try another digit)

## Dataset

The dataset that was used to train the model can be obtained from: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/

It is the MNIST dataset of handwritten digits. It consists of 70,000 images of handwritten digits. Of these images, 60,000 belong to the training set and 10,000 to the testing set. The images in this dataset have already been pre-processed such that the digits are centered, and the size of the images is uniform. This dataset is optimal for training a classification model to recognize handwritten digits.

## Model

The model used for the project was custom-made using the keras module. It is a Sequential model with two 2D convolutional layers and two dense layers. In all these layers, the ‘relu’ activation function is used. The output layer is a dense layer with a ‘softmax’ activation function. The loss function is categorical cross entropy and the optimization algorithm used is adam. The metric for evaluation is accuracy.

To train the model, artificial data was generated by rotating, zooming, shifting, and shearing the images from the MNIST dataset. The model was trained for 10 epochs with each epoch having a batch size of 100.


## Installation

Download repo and run the following command to install dependencies.

```bash
pip install requirements.txt
```

The below command trains the model and saves an *.h5* file
```python
python model.py
```

## Usage

The working demo of the project can be accessed here : http://mnist-digit-ocr.canadacentral.azurecontainer.io

The docker container can be accessed here: https://hub.docker.com/r/rencete/mnist-digit-ocr

The container can be pulled from docker using the following command:

```
docker pull rencete/mnist-digit-ocr
```

## License
[MIT](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)
